---
title:      State considered harmful
subtitle:   A proposal for a stateless laptop
author:     Joanna Rutkowska
date:       December 2015
version:    1.0
---

# Introduction

Modern Intel x86-based endpoint systems, such as laptops, are plagued by a
number of security-related problems. Additionally, with the recent introduction
of Intel Management Engine (ME) microcontroller into _all_ new Intel processors,
the trustworthiness of the Intel platform has been seriously questioned.

In a recently published paper [@x86_harmful] the author has presented an
in-depth survey of these topics. In this paper the author proposes what she
believes might be a reasonable, practical and relatively simple solution to most
of the problems.

The main principle introduced below is the requirement for the laptop hardware
to be _stateless_, i.e. lacking any persistent storage. This includes it having
no firmware-carrying flash memory chips. All the state is to be kept on an
external, trusted device. This trusted device is envisioned to be of a small USB
stick or SD card form factor.

This clean separation of state-carrying vs. stateless silicon is, however, only
one of the requirements, itself not enough to address many of the problems
discussed in the article referenced above. There are a number of additional
requirements: for the endpoint (laptop) hardware, for the trusted "stick", and
for the host OS. We discuss them in this paper.

The author thinks the solution proposed here is not limited to solving the
Intel-specific challenges and might be useful for other future platforms also.

Those readers who can't help but think that the (Intel) x86 is an already a lost
battle, and that we should be moving to other architectures, are advised to have
a look at the end of the paper where such alternatives are quickly discussed,
and then... potentially jump back here to continue reading.

# State(-carrying) considered harmful

There are several fundamental reasons why endpoint computing devices, such as
laptops, without clearly defined separation of state-carrying elements are
problematic:

1. The presence of persistent storage intermixed with the hardware makes it
   possible for the attacker to persist malware on the platform, without the
   user to have any simple way of learning about it, nor removing it (e.g. via
   OS re-installation).
   
2. This also allows dishonest vendors, such as the OEMs or shipping agents, to
   deliver already infected hardware without the user being able to easily find
   out. This also includes Evil Maid attacks, which might be executed by other
   actors than vendors.

3. The malware, once installed on the platform somehow, is given places where to
   store stolen secrets from the user. This is especially worrisome in the
   context of disk encryption keys, which could be exfiltrated this way even on
   air-gapped machines.^[In such cases the leaked keys would become readily
   available to whoever has seized the laptop and has the keys to decrypt the
   backdoor-created data with the keys inside.]

4. Finally, these state-carrying elements make it possible to identify platforms
   and ultimately their users, due to various personally identifiable
   information, such as MAC addresses for WiFi or BT, which make the hardware
   unique.

It's worth stressing that modern computer architectures make it very hard,
sometimes impossible, for the user to inspect what firmware has really been
programmed into the flash memory on the platform[^inspecting_firmware]. This is
especially true for any so called tamper-proof chips. The use of such "secure"
chips on endpoint computing devices should be avoided at all cost (see also
discussion at the end of the paper). Any tamper-proof electronics on client
systems should be considered harmful to the user as they jeopardize any form of
transparency or verification.

[^inspecting_firmware]: Indeed, by merely asking a flash-hosting device, such as
the SPI flash chip, or some other u-controller such as one used on a NIC, to
tell us what firmware it has inside, we can only get as trustworthy a response
as is the device itself, or worse even: as is the current firmware that is used
to serve our request... A classic chicken and egg problem.

# The Stateless Laptop

In this chapter a vision for the stateless laptop is described. The author
believes the clean separation of state introduced by these modification would be
attractive not just on current x86-based platforms, but also on any future
platforms, be they based on ARM or any other processor architectures.

Also discussed are additional modifications needed to make the laptop more
trustworthy, or to state it in a more direct way: much less of a threat to its
user. 

## State-carrying elements on modern laptops

We start by identifying the state-carrying (persistence-carrying) elements on a
modern x86 laptop. These are:

1. The SPI flash chip carrying the BIOS, ME, and other firmware.

2. The Embedded Controller (EC), which is an OEM-specific microcontroller (uC),
   and which requires its own flash memory, which might be either implemented
   inside the uC itself or as a discrete chip on the board (potentially shared
   with the SPI flash chip mentioned in the previous point).

3. Additional discrete devices, such as e.g. the WiFi or BT modules. Typically
   they would contain their own flash memories to hold their own firmware.

4. Finally, there is the hard disk.^[The disk should not be confused with the
   SATA controller, which is part of the processor package on the latest Intel
   models.]

Notably the above list does not contain the processor package, which includes
the actual processor (CPU), and what was previously known as "the chipset",
comprising the MCH (formerly the "northbridge"), and ICH/PCH (formerly the
"southbridge"). Indeed, it seems that none of the modern processors are being
equipped with flash-able memory. The reason for this seems to be resulting from
the limitation of the manufacturing technology as used for modern processors. If
it was otherwise, we would likely not see discrete SPI flash chips for holding
of the BIOS, ME, and other firmware on notebook motherboards anymore...

Although it's worth mentioning that Intel processor packages still contain a
residual form of persistent state storage: so called fuses. It's unclear to the
author if it's possible for the processor itself to blow its own fuses.^[More
specifically: for either the instructions running on the host CPU, or those
running on the ME processor to blow the fuses.] Even if that was possible,
however, it seems like the usefulness of this form of state storage would be
very limited to the attacker: it could potentially only be used once, and only
for storing very short secrets. Notably, it doesn't seem it could be used for
platform re-infection.^[Although it could be used to implement reply-protection
for hypothetical CPU-based backdoors, as discussed in
[@rutkowska_cpu_backdoors_thoughts].]

Because we don't have any control over the processor package, i.e. we must
accept it the way it is, at least if we want to build an x86 laptop today, and
also because of the limitations mentioned above, we will treat the processor
package as a stateless element in the rest of this paper. Nevertheless, it would
be desirable if the processor vendors used such a technology for fuses
implementation, as it would not be possible for the processor itself to
self-blow these.

Let us now discuss what we could potentially do about all the above mentioned
state-carrying elements.

## The SPI flash chip

The platform's firmware-carrying flash chip (the SPI flash as it's often called)
presents the biggest challenge for us, the state-less laptop proponents. The SPI
flash chip is tasked with several crucial goals on modern Intel x86 laptops:

1. It provides the firmware to the Intel ME processor. Failure to do so would,
   most likely, result in the platform shutdown.^[While there is no clear
   officially statement in the Intel platform specs about this, it's considered
   a tribal knowledge among many experts.] 

2. It provides the BIOS firmware. Failure to provide a valid BIOS firmware would
   render the platform un-bootable.

3. It provides the firmware to some of the integrated devices, such as Ethernet
   network controller, potentially also other devices. Also, it might provide
   some of the crucial personally identifiable information, such as the MAC
   address(es) to be used by the networking device(s).

4. Additionally, the flash chip serves as a storage space for various persistent
   platform configuration settings, for both the BIOS as well as the Intel ME.

The general idea is to remove the SPI flash chip from the motherboard, and route
the wiring to one of the external ports, such as either a standard SD or a USB
port, or perhaps even to a custom connector[^custom_connector]. A Trusted Stick
(discussed in the next chapter) would be then plugged into this port before the
platform boots, and would be delivering all the required firmware requested by
the processor, as well as other firmware and, optionally, all the software for
the platform.

[^custom_connector]: While use of a custom connector might increase the cost of
manufacturing of a Stateless Laptop, it might have some advantages related to
usability (clear indication to the user where to plug the Trusted Stick), and
messaging ("This laptop is _supposed_ to be implementing the stateless laptop
standard").

One problem is that when the system wants to read the ME or the BIOS firmware,
none of the devices, not even the DRAM memory is initialized at this stage. This
means we cannot use e.g. a USB controller, and consequently a USB "stick" easily
to provide the firmware at this stage. What we can do, however, is to reuse some
of the pins in a USB port for the purpose of passing the SPI connections to our
Trusted Stick. Ideally these could be multiplexed with original USB port
connections, so that after the platform boot is complete, the USB port could be
used as a fully featured USB port.^[Without dynamic multiplexing of these extra
signals, we would need to downgrade a USB 3.0 port to USB 2.0, as we would
likely need to use the 4 "Super Speed" signals to pipe SPI over them.]

In either case, the goal is to relocate the SPI flash element from the
motherboard -- where it cannot be neither properly protected (e.g. against
software-based reflashing attacks, or physical Evil Maid attacks), nor reliably
verified by the user. By relocating it to the Trusted Stick, we

1. provide a reliable way to enforce read-only property of the (select) firmware
   partitions,

2. allow the user to reliably inspect its content, perhaps using some other
   (more trusted) machine,

3. also allow the user to reliably write content to the stick (e.g. an image for
   a trustworthy BIOS the user decides to use).


## The Embedded Controller's flash memory

The Embedded Controller (which should not be confused with Intel ME) is a little
auxiliary, discrete, microcontroller connected through an LPC bus to the
chipset. It is responsible for 1) keyboard operation, 2) thermal management, 3)
battery charging control and 4) various other OEM-specific things, such as LEDs,
custom switches, etc. More discussion about how this uC might be compromising
platform's safety has been provided in [@x86_harmful].

In this paper, however, we're more concerned with the fact that the uC that is
used to implement EC would typically also contain an internal flash memory (e.g.
see [@chromium_ec]), yielding it a state-carrying element on the platform,
something we would like to avoid.^[Admittedly the EC, no matter how evil
firmware it executes, would not be able to interfere with the platform boot
sequence, and thus would not be able to compromise the system or any other
software execution directly. However, as already discussed in [@x86_harmful],
the EC might pull out a few other, more subtle attacks, such as e.g. injecting
keystrokes that could trigger some actions that might also be fatal. Or, as one
of the reviewers noted, might pretend the system is off when it really is not,
which might be problematic e.g. when switching between supposedly separate boot
environments, or trying to prevent potential Cold Boot attacks.]

We thus would like to use a uC without a built-in flash-able memory, one that
expects the firmware for execution to be provided by an external chip. One
example of such a chip is the one used by the OLPC and Purism laptops
[@olpc_kb3930_datasheet].

## The hard disk

The internal hard disk is an obvious device which is capable of storing the
state. In fact this is the very reason disks are made.

What might be less obvious though, is that disks typically contain their own uC
with their own internal flash-able memory. This naturally breaks the stateless
requirement for the platform even further...

Also, due to potentially backdoored firmware, or just due to how modern
solid-state disks work (wear-leveling mechanisms), some information stored
directly on the disk by malware (such as the stolen user disk encryption key)
might not be easy for the user to wipe using traditional disk shredding methods.

There are two ways how to solve the above problems:

1. Get rid of the hard disk, and rely on external storage only (perhaps also
   implemented on the Trusted Stick) connected e.g. through USB or SD protocols.
   Of course this solution is neither elegant nor convenient. Also an internal
   disk will always excel in terms of speed and capacity for a given cost.

2. Use an internal disk with _trusted_ firmware satisfying the requirements
   discussed in the next section.

## The trusted internal hard disk requirements

The first requirement for using an internal disk would be for it be flash-less,
of course. The disk uC would need to obtain its firmware from the trusted stick,
just like the EC described above is expected to do that.

Additionally, the firmware that would power the disk would need to be _trusted_
(this is in contrast to e.g. the ME firmware which we do not assume to be
trusted!). Trusted, to do a few things:

1. Implement reliable read-only protection for select partitions on the disk
   (e.g. those containing the /boot and root filesystems),

2. Implement reliable transparent encryption for anything that is ever written
   to the disk. In other words make it impossible (e.g. for the malware in the
   ME or on the host) to store anything on the disk that would not be encrypted
   with a _user_ controllable key. This requirement has an added advantage that
   wiping of all the user data on the disk can be implemented by simply throwing
   away the encryption key, something that could be done very quickly and
   easily.

The above requirements demand, in practice, the disk hardware to be of
open-hardware design, running open-firmware. Fortunately it appears significant
work has already been made in this area [@openssd_project], which should be a
good starting point.

It should be reiterated here the requirement for the trusted internal disk is an
optional one, and it is envisioned that meanwhile an external disk could used,
ideally integrated into the Trusted Stick.

## Other discrete elements

Occasionally there might be additional discrete devices on the laptop, such as a
discrete GPU. Such devices will likely come with their own internal flash
memory, thus breaking the stateless principle. In most cases these discrete
devices would also be bus-mastering devices (capable of issuing DMA to host
memory), which means they could not only be used as a secret storage, but also
interfere with the platform boot process if it is not properly secured against
DMA from devices.^[The author is not aware of any BIOS implementation that
would actively try to protect itself against potential DMA attacks
originating from devices during boot, especially early boot.]

It's thus best to ensure no discrete devices are present on the laptop,
especially no discrete GPUs. We talk more about the discrete wireless cards,
such as WiFi and cellular modem, below.^[One of the reviewers also pointed to
battery as a potential element containing embedded microcontroller with its own
flash memory. Needless to say such "smart batteries" should be avoided and all
the charging/monitoring logic implemented by the EC, or using "dumb" electronics
without persistent state storage.]

## Other modifications to the laptop

In addition to removing persistent state-carrying elements from the laptop,
there are also a few other minor, yet important, modifications that are needed
to assure the laptop is not harmful to the user. We discuss these below.

## The wireless devices

All the wireless devices (WiFi, BT, 3G/LTE modems, etc.) deserve special
consideration (even if they do not have their own flash memory) because they
provide a very convenient way for the malware that runs on the platform (e.g. in
the ME or SMM, or even on the host OS) to leak information using a wireless
channel (so, a channel very difficult to block or notice). This could happen
irrespectively of whether the user decided to consciously enable and use the
actual device or not (e.g. turned on WiFi in the host OS and connected to a WiFi
network).

Additionally any wireless device could be used to gather information about the
user surroundings, such as e.g. the list of active WiFi networks (SSIDs) or BT
devices MAC addresses.

Admittedly though, most such exfiltration channels would require the attacker to
be physically close to the user's laptop, so for some of the users this might
not be a realistic threat^[Although the adversary might use e.g. the user's
phone as a relaying device]. Notably with one exception -- if the malware
managed to interpose on legitimate traffic generated by the user, e.g. by
finding and modifying network buffers in the host memory, it might then easily
leak the stolen secrets at least to the user's ISP, or with some luck, to
whatever server on the Internet the user chose to establish connection with. We
discuss this problem as well as potential countermeasures later in this paper.

Similarly not every user would be concerned about their physical location being
leaked (through the information sniffed by the wireless devices). But for those
who care, a mechanism is needed to prevent this from happening.

The easiest way to address all the above mentioned problems is to fit a physical
kill switch for each (or all) of the wireless devices. Care should be taken for
the switch(es) to control the actual power supply wires to the devices, rather
than merely asking the devices to disable themselves, a request which a
malicious device (or one with an infected firmware) might simply ignore.

Of course physical kill switches are not an elegant solution, as in most cases
the user would like to have some form of wireless connectivity. After all there
is a reason we want to have these networking devices in the first place... As
mentioned we will consider this problem in more details later in this paper. For
now suffice to say that it would be beneficial to either: 1) not have any
internal WiFi or BT card, or 2) a simple networking proxy implemented on an
external (trusted) uC, not directly connected to the host processor.

It should be pointed out for completeness, that a GPS receiver (if fitted to the
laptop), while a one-way radio device, should also be fitted with a kill switch,
for the reasons discussed above.

## The audio and camera devices

The audio and video (camera) devices can compromise user's privacy similarly to
the above discussed wireless devices. In addition to the obvious threats posed
by these devices, it's perhaps worth mentioning a possibility of using the mic
and the camera not only to sniff the conversations in the room where the laptop
is kept, but also to allow the attacker to sniff the user's disk and login
password. Also, it seems possible, in theory at least, for the malware to use
the speakers to communicate with other devices (such as the user's phone or even
an internet-connected TV) in order to exfiltrate some low-bandwidth information
(e.g. the disk decryption key stolen from the host DRAM page or registers).

For this reason it seems only reasonably to put all the audio and video devices
behind physical kill switches, just like it was recommended for all the wireless
ones. Again it should be stressed the physical switches should be cutting the
actual power or signal lines to the devices, accounting for potentially
misbehaving ones.

## Volatile memory quick wiping 

Finally, one additional aspect of building a stateless laptop is to account for
all the state accumulated in the _volatile_ memory, specifically DRAM and the
processor internal SRAM used by the ME. Even though we're talking about volatile
memory, it's a well know fact that residual information might remain there for a
surprisingly long time [@coldboot_attack]. Additionally, the ME internal memory
(SRAM) is believed to remain to be sustained despite platform normal shutdown
state, as the ME is still in operation, albeit it might be in sleep mode (again,
the platform does not need to be in e.g. S3 for this).

Thus a mechanism is needed to ensure, upon user's request, a reliable and quick
clearing of all the volatile memories fitted on the platform. This might be the
default behaviour every time the platform is going to be shutdown for
hibernation. One of the reviewers suggested short-circuiting Vcc with GND pins
might do the trick for the processor and DRAM.

\newpage

## Putting it all together

The diagram below wraps up our discussion so far:

           +-----------------------------------------+
           |           +--------+            +-----+ |
           |           |  HDD   |<----SPI(?)-| SPI | |
           |           +--------+            | MUX | |
           |               | USB/PCIe/       |     | |  +---------------+
           |               | SATA            |     |<---| Trusted Stick |
           |        +-----------+            |     | |  +---------------+
           |        | Processor |<----SPI----|     | |
           |        |    Chip   |            |     | |
           |        +-----------+            +-----+ |
    ((+))  |            USB| | LPC              |    |
      |    | +------+      | |                  |    |
      |    | | WiFi | USB +------+              |    |
      +------|      |-----|  EC  |<----SPI------+    |
           | +------+     +------+                   |
           +-----------------------------------------+

    Fig 1. The stateless laptop with trusted internal disk and network proxy.

A new element introduced on the above diagram is the "SPI MUX" box. It's a
multiplexer for the SPI buses coming from different devices, which are normally
expecting to be the only ones talking to the SPI flash chip.  It should be
possible to implement this using an FPGA (for a prototype) or an inexpensive
ASIC (for production models).

The next diagram shows a simplified laptop: without trusted internal disk
(implemented according to the requirements laid out above), and also without
networking proxy (as discussed later), but rather using an external
USB-connected WiFi device.

\newpage

                        +-----+
                        | SD/ |
                        | USB |
                        \-----+      USB/SD
                           | ..............................
                           | :                            :
           +---------------|-:-----------------------+    :
           |               | :               +-----+ |    :
           |               | :               | SPI | |    :
           |               | :               | MUX | |    :
           |               | :               |     | |  +---------------+
           |               v V               |     |<---| Trusted Stick |
           |        +-----------+            |     | |  +---------------+
           |        | Processor |<----SPI----|     | |
           |     +--|    Chip   |            |     | |
           |     |  +-----------+            +-----+ |
    ((+))  |     |           | LPC              |    |
      | +------+ |           |                  |    |
      | |      | |        +------+              |    |
      +-| USB  |-+        |  EC  |<----SPI------+    |
        +------+          +------+                   |
           +-----------------------------------------+

    Fig 2. The simplified stateless laptop (no internal disk, USB WiFI)

It might also be possible to use a microcontroller with one-time-programmable
(OTP) memory in order to avoid the need to do the SPI multiplexing, and so to
further simplify the construction of the laptop and the Trusted Stick. While an
OTP would not provide state persistence, it would still be a sub-optimal
solution because the user would (likely) not be able to inspect the firmware, or
load one the they want.

# The Trusted Stick

The Trusted Stick, a small device of a "USB stick" or an SD card form factor, is
an element that the user always carries with themselves and which contains all
the "state" for the platform. This includes the (encrypted) user files and
platform configuration.  It also is expected to carry all the software and --
what is unique as of today -- firmware for the platform, and also enforce
read-only'iness of these.^[A mechanism for updating the software and firmware on
the stick should be explicitly under the control of the user. One can easily
imagine this to be implemented using a physical switch on the stick, i.e.
something that software could not be able to interfere with.]

As the name suggests, it is assumed the device is to be _trusted_. In other
words, should this device malfunction (due to a bug in its own firmware), or get
compromised by the attacker somehow, the security of the user data is in
jeopardy.

It is thus expected this device should be as simple as possible to assure it's
reasonably secure, and also to make it possible for various vendors, ideally by
users themselves, to be able to build it. It goes without saying the device
should be an open-source, open-hardware device. The author believes there is no
excuse for entrusting proprietary products with such important things as
ones digital life.

We are now considering what functionality should the Trusted Stick implement.

## Firmware Storage

First of all it should provide read-only (from the host perspective at least)
storage for all the platform firmware.  This includes the Intel ME, the BIOS
(including any blobs it might depend on, such as the FSP, ACMs, etc.), any of
the standard integrated devices firmware (e.g. the GbE firmware), as well as
firmware for the OEM-specific Embedded Controller, and potentially other
devices, such as the already discussed (optional) internal disk, and perhaps any
discrete networking devices.

The above (read-only) firmware storage should cover also any platform
configuration. Typically the BIOS, ME, and potentially other devices would want
to use some parts of the flash partitions to store their own configuration (e.g.
which devices to boot from, the MAC address, etc).

It should be stressed that all this firmware should be exposed to the platform
(e.g. to the host processor or the EC u-controller) using the standard protocols
that would normally be used to fetch the firmware. In most cases this is the SPI
protocol.

## Disk Storage

In addition to playing the role of a firmware storage (in practice: an SPI flash
device), the Trusted Stick might also act as a normal mass storage device, seen
by the host as e.g. a USB mass storage device, or an SD card.

Here we should further distinguish between two types of storage that is going to
be exposed to the platform (the same applies also in the scenario with an
internal trusted disk):

1. A read-only non-encrypted storage containing the system code (i.e. the
   bootloader, the boot partition, and the root filesystem),

2. A writeable (but encrypted) partition for the user files (i.e. the home
   directory and perhaps some additional system configuration). The key for the
   encryption could be derived from: 1) the user provided passphrase (provided
   via keyboard), optionally combined with: 2) a TPM-released secret which can
   be used, to some extent, to prevent laptop-replacing Evil Maid attacks (which
   we discuss at the end of this paper in more detail), 3) and also a secret
   generated by the Trusted Stick and subject to wiping in case the user
   requested secure deletion of all user-specific data.

It should be noted that it might not be possible to obtain the user passphrase
using the standard keyboard during early phase of the platform boot. It is not
expected this to be necessary because all the early boot firmware should not be
encrypted, but only read-only protected by the Trusted Stick. However, in case
it turned out that e.g. Intel ME refused to run having only read-only access
to its flash partition, then we might need to encrypt the flash partitions on
the Trusted Stick holding this early boot firmware. More on this at the end of
the paper.

An alert user might be wondering what a TPM device is doing on a stateless
laptop? After all the TPM has its own non-volatile memory, doesn't it?
Interestingly on the recent Intel platforms the TPM has been integrated into the
processor package (it's in fact an application running on the ME processor), and
so it uses the system's SPI flash memory as its own non-volatile storage. Of
course everything that is written there is encrypted with a key that is
tamper-proof protected inside the processor, so the mere fact the attacker is
able to read the SPI flash content with an external programmer does not
compromise safety of this TPM's storage. While it hasn't been confirmed
experimentally if such a processor-internal TPM would work with a read-only
storage exposed by the Trusted Stick, it seems plausible to expect it
should^[And in case it didn't work with a read-only flash, we might still be
able to use it with an encrypted writeable flash, as discussed later in the
paper]. Of course the user would be expected to let the TPM write its generated
keys during the platform initialization, by operating the read-protect switch
on the Trusted Stick.


## The variant with internal trusted disk

As already discussed earlier, assuming a trusted, open implementation of an
internal hard disk was available, then the stick would not need to act as (fast)
storage. It would only have to provide the decryption key to the (trusted)
internal disk device.^[Potentially it might also be providing the /boot
partition, although the benefit of this is unclear.]

The primary benefit in this case would be the simplification of the stick: no
need to fit high-capacity, high-performance flash memory. Depending on the
application this could be an important benefit.
 

## Self-destruct

Optionally, at least for some groups of users, it might be desirable for the
Trusted Stick to implement quick and reliable wiping of its content, especially
of the user partition.^[Although, there might be scenarios extending this
requirement also for other partitions, i.e. these holding the firmware and
system image.] This should be easily implemented by securely erasing just the
encryption key, for which even a small battery or perhaps even a capacitor
should be enough.


# Addressing leaks through networking

Assuming the platform might be compromised with sophisticated rootkits, e.g.
running in SMM or ME, that are actively trying to steal e.g. GPG private keys
from the host memory, it is important to ensure the malware cannot leak the data
using networking. It should be realized that for malware running in ME or SMM it
might be possible to leak data using networking irrespectively of what specific
networking hardware is in use by the host OS. It should be just enough for the
malware to (asynchronously) find pages containing what looks like specific data
structures (e.g. Linux sk_buff structures) and modify just a few fields there in
order to implement some form of covert channel for exfiltration (see
e.g.[@rutkowska_nushu]).

On the other hand, such advanced malware (e.g. especially when running in the
ME) might be reluctant to (somehow blindly) modify outgoing networking packets
without fully understanding the bigger picture of the specifics of the
environment and the user setup. This is because such modifications might easily
be detected by more inquisitive users or admins, using more or less standard
network analysis tools, risking detection of the malware. Again, for malware
located that deep in the hardware, in the processor itself, this might not be
acceptable. Nevertheless, let's discuss what we could do to prevent such leaks
anyway. We will do that starting from the simplified scenario of an air-gapped
system, then move on to increasingly more connected scenarios.

## Scenario 0: An air-gapped system (no network)

Contrary to what it might seem at first sight, the mere fact that we are keeping
the laptop not connected to any network does not automatically make it a truly
air-gapped system! If there is malware on the laptop it can still establish
communication with the outside world through a number of channels: it might use
the existing WiFi or BT, or LTE/3G devices to send packets to other
attacker-controlled devices^[Which might be the user phone or Smart TV, for
example.], ostensibly without connecting to any network. It might even use more
exotic means of establishing covert channels, such as the audio spectrum using
the built-in speakers, as mentioned previously in this document.

Also, even if the system is not yet compromised (i.e. no malware or backdoors
running on it yet), it might get compromised when devices such as WiFi or BT are
exposed to the environment and are processing the (untrusted) input "from the
air" around the laptop.^[This is especially true if the host OS does not
explicitly try to sandbox the devices, drivers, and corresponding stacks, which
is often the case.]

Thus to keep the laptop truly air-gapped one must ensure access to all these
devices is forbidden, and not just to the host OS, but also to any of the
hardware on the platform, including the processor. The physical kill switches
seem to be a reliable way for guaranteeing this, as discussed previously.
Obviously, assuming such kill switches have been fitted (and set to the "off"
positions), and assuming that the stateless laptop is indeed lacking any
persistent memory, and that even if the ME (or any other rootkit) managed to
steal any of the user data, it would not be able to leak them anyway.^[One
reviewer pointed the malware might try to e.g. modulate CPU usage, thus
indirectly trying to leaking the data via electro-magnetic field...]

A truly world-disconnected computer is of very limited use, however. In practice
we would like to transfer some files from/to such an air-gapped system. One
popular approach is to use a USB storage device (stick) for that purpose. Such
an approach, however, exposes the air-gapped computer to potential infections
when its host OS is processing the device, volume, and filesystem metadata
brought by this device. Additionally, and more importantly, a potential
backdoor, e.g. in the ME, might now dump all the previously stolen data onto the
stick (and these blobs might now not be easy discoverable by the user, thanks to
e.g. the wear levelling mechanisms used on the stick, or potentially backdoored
firmware on the said USB device).

A better approach is to use physically read-only media, such as DVD-R. While
such a medium can still bring infection to the air-gapped system, it wouldn't be
possible to use it to exfiltrate the stolen data^[Although one should remember
the DVD-R driver will likely be fitted with its own uC featuring its own flash
memory, which might be a good candidate for malware to store stolen secrets
to.]. Of course, this would result in a "black-hole" use model -- the air-gapped
system can only accept files from the outside world, but never give anything
back to the universe -- again, possibly a sub-optimal use of computer
technology...

## Scenario 1: A closed network of trusted peers

Now, let's consider a closed network of trusted peers who would like to
communicate securely with each other, also exchanging files.^[Again, this means,
by definition, that any of these "trusted peers" is able to compromise the whole
network.] Of course the humankind has researched this problem extensively over
the last couple of decades, which resulted in an abundance of cryptographic
protocols allowing to build secure tunnels over insecure networks.

However, assuming a rootkit running in the ME or SMM, we're suddenly facing a
significantly more difficult challenge. This is because the ME might be now
piggybacking stolen information (such as the session keys for the crypto
tunnels we're trying to build) on the existing network packets, allowing an
adversary -- who e.g. controls the user's ISP -- to receive them on a plate.

In order to prevent this from happening we need to move the actual networking
device away from the jurisdiction of the ME and the host processor. It seems
convenient, at first thought, to place the networking device on the Trusted
Stick. Indeed, if the trusted module was implemented as a USB-pluggable device
then it would be able to provide emulated Ethernet device to the host. The
Trusted Stick would then perform simple tunneling to establish the virtual
trusted network with other peers (hopefully using also similarly designed
laptops). This way, even if a hypothetical ME rootkit was trying to leak some
information over networking, this would get encapsulated into the encrypted
tunnel, which only the trusted peers were able to see.^[Admittedly, as several
reviewers noted, the rootkit might try to leak the stolen keys by interfering
with the timings of packet transmissions, or using some other sophisticated
side-channel attack...]

Implementing Ethernet-emulation and networking proxy on the Trusted Stick has
several disadvantages though:

1. It complicates the Trusted Stick design, increasing its cost, as well as its
   size (which is an important factor given the stick is assumed to be carried
   by the user with themselves all the time, perhaps in a form of a necklace, or
   maybe even a ring in the future).

2. Even more importantly: it significantly enlarges the attack surface on this
   trusted device. Admittedly the uC used for networking proxy implementation
   might be a physically different one than the chip used for SPI firmware
   exposure, although this would now complicate the host-stick interface, in
   addition to further increasing the cost and size.

However, just as we discussed the use of a stateless internal disk (which runs a
trusted firmware from the stick), we could similarly envision a simple
networking proxy implemented using a stateless (i.e. flash-less) uC, which would
then connect to a traditional WiFi card. The WiFi, however, would _not_ be
directly connected to the host CPU.

Incidentally we have already outlined the need for a stateless uC on the laptop
-- this is to implement the Embedded Controller. It seems thus logical to use
this same uC for both realization of the EC as well as for the (trusted)
networking proxy.
 
Obviously it would take time to write firmware implementing the envisioned
proxy, and before this one is ready, a temporary solution could be to use an
external, USB-connected or Ethernet-connected network proxy (similar in nature
to e.g. [@thegrugq_portal]).

## Scenario 2: Tor-ified or VPN-ed open Internet

Let's now consider the traditional scenario in which the user wants to interact
with any computer on the Internet, whether trusted or not.

In this scenario we would also like to use the previously discussed networking
tunneling proxy. Of course at some point the tunnel would need to be terminated
and the user connection will now be visible to some 3rd party Internet
infrastructure, including the final 3rd party server (e.g. a cat-photo-serving
website the user might be addicted to). The termination of the tunnel would take
place at a VPN service provider (which we assume to be a trusted service
provider for the user), or at a Tor exit node (which itself is not assumed to be
trusted, but the Tor network, as a whole, should be in that case).

Now, assuming the malware has modified the content of the user-generated packets
high enough (OSI-layer wise), such as e.g. modified some of the HTTP(s) headers
or data payloads, the 3rd party infrastructure or the final server would be able
to read any potentially covertly transmitted data from the compromised machine. 

But the attacker (who controls the cat-pictures service server), even though
receiving some of the user sensitive data, e.g. disk encryption key, might not
be able to figure out which user do they belong to. Of course the user might
have plenty of identifiable information on their laptop, and the malware might
be smart enough to search around for them and include them with the blobs sent
over the covert channel. Theoretically, if the user was careful enough this
might not be the case, but in reality expecting the user to be so careful with
regards to _all_ of the activity performed on their laptop, might be
unacceptable for most users.

Typically users would be willing to be careful only with regards to some of the
_domains_, while would like to "live a normal life" in others. Operating systems
such as Qubes OS [@qubes_os] try to resolve this problem by using Virtual
Machine-based compartmentalization. Sadly in case of malware operating in the ME
or SMM^[Although systems that properly use compartmentalization might make it
very hard for the SMM to ever get infected.  On the other hand, they can do
nothing against the backdoors built in by vendors right from start.] the Virtual
Machine technology (even augmented by technology such as Intel VT-x and VT-d) is
of little help.^[Admittedly Intel VT-x allows for SMM sandboxing using Dual
Monitor Mode, although in practice there seem to be lots of problems with this
approach, as the author has discussed in [@x86_harmful].]

On the other hand, forcing the attacker's malware to modify only high-level
protocol payloads to leak data might already be considered a significant win.
The higher protocol the attacker needs to intercept, the higher the complexity
of the malware, which increases the probability of getting caught by curious
users or administrators.

In addition the attacker has little control over which servers or infrastructure
she should control in order to be able to receive stolen data from a given user.

## Scenario 3: Unconstrained Internet access?

Not every user would like to forward all their networking through Tor or even a
fast VPN gateway. The primary reason not to do that might be the limitation on
the bandwidth and latency imposed by such proxies.

A user might typically want to use such proxies for only some of their
activities (say to follow the news surrounding anti-government protests), while
still enjoying "un-handicapped" Internet for other activities (such as watching
full HD cat movies).

The problem with such an approach, again, is that the potential malware might
choose to piggyback the stolen information onto the innocent traffic.

About the only one left solution here would be to keep an eye on the traffic
generated by the user. The adversary knowing that the user might be closely
monitoring their traffic should be reluctant to (somehow blindly) piggyback a
covert channel on top of it, afraid of getting caught. Thus, it would seem more
reasonable for the adversary to target higher-level protocols also in this
scenario, facing also the same problems as discussed in the previous section.


# (Un)trusting firmware and the host OS

## Firmware considerations

We would like to treat most of the platform firmware as untrusted. This applies
to the Intel ME, other devices, and the BIOS. While it should be obvious why
Intel ME should be considered untrusted, it's also prudent to treat the BIOS as
untrusted even if we decided to use an open-source implementation, such as
coreboot [@coreboot]. This is because the task of creating a truly secure, i.e.
attack-resistant, BIOS implementation for Intel x86 platform seems like a very
challenging task. Not to mention that it is currently very difficult
(impossible?) to have a truly open source BIOS which would not need to execute
Intel-provided blobs such as the Intel FSP.

The trick of keeping the platform's firmware on the trusted stick is a
game-changer here, because we can be reasonably confident the stick will: 1)
implement proper read-only protection, this way stopping any potential
flash-persisting attacks originating from the platform, and 2) even if the
firmware was to be somehow malicious, the construction of our stateless laptop
leaves no places for the malware to store any data stolen from the user. (It
could still try to leak it through networking, a problem we discussed in more
detail in the previous chapter.)

There are two important exceptions with regard to trusting the firmware though:

1. If we decided to use an internal disk, as discussed earlier, then we would
   need to trust the disk's firmware to properly implement encryption, and
   read-only protection for select sectors/partitions,

2. If we decided to use the Embedded Controller (again, let's not confuse this
   with the Intel ME) to implement internal networking proxy (as discussed
   below), then we would need to trust its firmware also.

Of course, as already discussed, both of these devices would be fetching the
firmware from the Trusted Stick.

## Host OS considerations

It's tempting to also assume the host OS could be treated as untrusted, using
the similar argumentation we just used to convince ourselves we didn't need to
trust Intel ME or the BIOS...

Indeed, at least for the networking scenarios #0 (air-gap) and #1 (closed
network of trusted peers), as discussed in the previous chapter, that might
indeed be a justified assumption.

However, for the more open networking scenarios #2 and #3, this might no longer
be the case. Indeed, an insecure OS might allow malware infections that could
now use all the convenience of a locally-executing program to steal user data,
collect additional personal identifying information, and exfiltrate all this to
some remote server using one of the million of ways how modern malware
typically would do that. This would naturally lower the bar for the adversary
significantly, almost negating the benefits of a stateless laptop...

This means it is still prudent to run a secure OS on the stateless laptop.

## Reconsidering BIOS and ME (un)trusting?

An alert user might, however, now point out that we cannot assume the host OS to
provide any security if we don't trust the BIOS, or ME. In theory this is true,
of course. In practice, however, we should consider how a malicious ME or BIOS
could potentially inject malware into our (otherwise secure) host OS. 

The only way for such an infection to occur would be either for the Intel ME, or
the BIOS, to inject malware into the host memory. In practice this means that
Intel would release a processor which, under certain circumstances (yet not
depending on any persistent state) writes malware to the host memory pages.

Alternatively this might have been done by the Intel FSP blob.^[Here we assume a
mostly open source BIOS has been used. Such a BIOS will still likely need to
execute the Intel FSP blob, and this blob would be the only place which might
inject the malware].

The author believe such a move would be extremely risky for a vendor like Intel.
Again, we should remember that such malware insertion (by either the processor
or FSP blob) could not be conditioned on any persistent state, and so would be
subject to reply "attack". In other words, once the processor or the FSP got
caught while pulling this off, it should be possible for the user to reproduce
and demonstrate this malicious behaviour arbitrary number of times subsequently.

Of course, Intel ME, or a malicious SMM, instead of injecting malware into the
host memory, might chose a more subtle approach and instead only expose a
privilege escalation backdoor which could then be used by some malware to
undermine security isolation offered by the host OS.^[E.g. the backdoor might
allow to escape a virtual machine, allowing some more-or-less standard malware
which came through some standard channels, such as an email attachment, and
which would otherwise be contained to some untrusted VM, to now spread over the
whole system.]

Again, by using a largely open source BIOS implementation we can practically
rule out such a backdoor in an SMM^[Indeed, it's hardly imaginable for the FSP
blob to bring such a backdoor into the SMM.]. This leaves us with the
possibility of the Intel ME providing this hidden escalation trap. That,
however, is something that a processor vendor might always do _trivially_,
without introducing technology such as Intel ME, as discussed e.g. in
[@rutkowska_cpu_backdoors_thoughts]. In that case, again, our only hope is that
Intel would not risk being caught red-handed, given the hypothetical backdoor
would need to be _stateless_.

We thus see that, while we cannot fully eliminate the problem of subversion of
the host OS security by potentially malicious processor, the construction of the
stateless laptop allows us to force the adversary into a very dangerous
territory, requiring them to take high risk and also making the attack very
complex.

It's worth nothing, however, how we have silently started assuming that we need
to have a largely open source BIOS (so largely trustworthy), even on our
stateless laptop. Needless to say, the coreboot project [@coreboot] is a natural
candidate for such a BIOS, and we are very lucky there is such a project in the
wild already.

# Addressing Evil Maid Attacks

Originally the term Evil Maid Attack [@itl_evil_maid_attack] was used to
describe attacks on the full disk encryption schemes. In such scenarios the
attacker (the Evil Maid) was replacing or infecting part of the code which was
asking the user for the disk decryption passphrase. Once the passphrase was
obtained from the unsuspecting user (who thought they provided it to the
legitimate system software), the malicious code could have store it somewhere
(e.g. save on unused disk sectors), or leak through networking, allowing the
attacker to decrypt the laptop once the attacker somehow got access to it
subsequently (e.g. after physically stealing it from the user, or perhaps
covertly making a copy of the hard disk).

But the old Evil Maid Attack concept can be easily generalized and applied to
the stateless laptop scenario. Now the Evil Maid would be replacing the whole
laptop, rather than just the software on it (because there is no software to be
replaced on the laptop in this case, of course). The new, fake, laptop would
look identical to the user from the outside, but might be a completely different
machine on the inside. E.g. it might be full of persistent memory, and also
feature an army of wireless devices to leak all the user secrets to everybody in
a radius of miles.

A special case of such an Evil Maid attack would be when the laptop was replaced
during shipment, or simply if the vendor of the laptop turned out to be (or was
forced to be) malicious.

What could we do about such attacks?

First, we should stress the primary reason behind introducing the stateless
laptop idea is _not_ to prevent sophisticated physical attacks, such as "full"
Evil Maid attacks which replace the whole laptop with an identically-looking
one.

Having said that, the author is of the opinion that the stateless laptop design
makes lots of physical attacks difficult, or simply not feasible. This applies
to the "classic" Evil Maid attacks, as well as various attacks targeting the
firmware.

Still, in order to somehow address (or increase the cost significantly) of the
full laptop-replacing Evil Maid attacks, one can think of several solutions
which include traditional physical-based protection applied to the laptop, when
it is being left unattended by the user. These are things such as custom,
personalized stickers, which make it more difficult to bring an identically
looking laptop, as well as more classic means in a form of a vault or strong
box, or a monitoring camera.

An inquisitive reader might wonder why would we need all this hassle with
stateless laptops, if the user was expected to implement the physical
protection, anyway?  As already mentioned several times in this paper, there are
many more problems with x86 platform, and which we try to resolve with the
stateless laptop, than just the physical attacks. Such other problems include:
software attacks on firmware, malicious firmware (backdoored by the vendor, or
somewhere during the shipment), software attacks against secure boot mechanisms.
A reader is, again, directed to the [@x86_harmful] for a more complete
discussion.

The physical protections mentioned above do not, however, resolve the problem of
the attackers subverting the laptop hardware at manufacturing or shipment
stages. This includes, naturally, a potentially conspiring laptop vendor.

In order to address this latter problem we -- the industry -- need to come up
with reliable and simple methods for comparing PCBs with each other. A tool
analogical to 'diff', only working for PCBs rather than on files. Such a tool,
implemented as a software, could e.g. take two (sets of) photos taken by the
user of the two boards to compare. The photos might be taken with an ordinary
camera, or, in a more sophisticated setup, using X-ray imaging to reveal also
the internal layer wiring. This inititive has already been proposed by other
researchers recently (e.g. [@appelbaum_technical_action_plan]), so it is not
unreasonable to expect some progress in this area in the near future.

Admittedly such an approach would not be able to detect sophisticated attacks
which replace the original laptop board with identically looking one
(connection- and chip-geometry-wise), yet with different chips. The author
thinks that such attacks might be very difficult to pull off in practice,
probably extremely pricey due to the need of manufacturing small series of
custom integrated circuits.


# Select implementation considerations

Here we briefly list some of the potential challenges and some other aspects
that are still left open for further discussion and research.

## SPI Flash emulation challenges

One anticipated complication for emulation of the SPI flash by the trusted stick
is that the processor (chipset) expects the specific timings to be met by the
SPI chip when reading firmware, so it's unlikely one could use a general-purpose
uC on the stick to emulate the flash chip. Also the timing requirements make it
unlikely that a regular SD storage card will work for us here.^[Which otherwise
sounds like a great solution, at least for prototyping, as most of these cards
should be implementing the simple SPI protocol.] Rather, we need a real SPI
flash chip located on the trusted stick, or better: an FPGA-based
implementation.^[The reason to use an FPGA-based implementation of an SPI flash
is transparency, required to assure that our Trusted Stick indeed implements
read-only protection for certain parts of the flash, as well as reliable
encryption for other partitions, as discussed earlier in the paper.]

Also it does not seem trivial to use the same one SPI chip to both serve the
firmware (i.e.  ME, BIOS, other) to the host processor, and at the same time to
also act as a flash provider to the EC, and optionally also to the internal
disk. The primary reason for this might be lack of a good multiplexing mechanism
built into the SPI protocol. This seems, however, merely a technical
complication that, in the worst case, could be resolved by having the Trusted
Stick exposing two separate SPI interfaces: one for the host processor, another
to the EC uC.  Of course, such an approach is far from ideal, as it increases
the amount of signals required for the port to which the Trusted Stick is
inserted.^[And we would like to keep these down to a minimum in order to be able
to re-use existing USB or SD ports.] As mentioned earlier, a temporary solution
might be to use a uC with OTP memory for firmware storage.

It's also not yet clear if the Intel ME (which is part of the processor) would
be happy when being put into an environment where the SPI flash it gets access
to is externally forced to be read-only. Should this be the case, it might be
necessary for the Trusted Stick to allow selective write-access for the ME
partition accesses. In that case this region should be encrypted by the Trusted
Stick, as already discussed earlier. This is to assure that in case the
processor wanted to store some user-compromising secrets there, these secrets
would not fall into the hands of an adversary. While this solution might seem
simple enough, a slight complication might arise from the inability to ask the
user for a passphrase (at least using the standard keyboard) upon early platform
boot. In that case we would likely need to use a key kept on the Trusted Stick
which is not conditioned on user passphrase to protect these partitions. It
might be even possible to use auto-generated, discard-able keys for this
purpose. Further research is needed.

## Host OS implementation considerations

As previously noted the host OS should be engineered so that it was able to boot
and operate efficiently from read-only storage. This is generally not a problem
today: many Linux distributions support such a mode of operation (LiveUSB). It
does however present some challenges for systems which aggressively try to
decompose their TCB, such as Qubes OS [@qubes_os]. Such systems would like to
keep all the USB subsystem, drivers, and devices into separate de-privileged
domains (VMs). In order to keep such USB-hosting domain(s) truly untrusted,
while at the same time use it as a provider (backend) for the system root
storage, special additional mechanisms would have to be used [@qubes_arch]. This
complication could be avoided, however, when an internal trusted disk was used
on the stateless laptop.


## User partition encryption considerations

It seems tempting to delegate the user partition encryption to the host -- after
all it runs the user approved trusted code from the stick's read-only partition,
while at the same time this simplifies the construction of the stick
significantly.

Unfortunately, running the encryption on the host processor we're exposing it to
potential malicious interference from the ME processor. The ME can e.g. steal
the encryption key from the host registers or memory pages and then try to leak
it through some of the user networking activity, although this might be very
difficult in practice as discussed earlier in the paper. What the ME can do,
however, and very simply, is to store some of the leaked user sensitive
information (such as the email private keys) on the user private partition
_without_ encrypting them with the user key, but rather with some other key.
This would then look like random garbage for the user, if they ever decided to
examine the sectors on the partition. But for the attacker who (physically)
obtains access to the user stick this might be immediately readable.

On the other hand, if it was the Trusted Stick that performed the encryption,
then there should be no way for the hypothetical ME rootkit to write anything
onto the user partition bypassing the forced encryption with the user key.

## Tamper-resistance considerations

The use of tamper-resistance technology is often thought as a beneficial means
to improve physical security of an endpoint device. Care must be applied
however as to whether this does not compromise the ultimate trustworthiness of
the product.

In the author's opinion it is unacceptable for any _code_, that the user is
forced to entrust their digital life to, to be tamper-proof-protected if that
results in an inability for the user to dump and analyze the code that runs on
the device at any time the user feels a need to do that.^[And it is completely
irrelevant whether the user would, in practice, be willing or capable to do that
or not -- it's a matter of having an _opportunity_ to do that. This is very
similar to guarantees of civil liberties, such as free speech.]

Thus a temper-proof mechanism might only be acceptable for the actual (small)
persistent memory which holds the bits of the user keys, and for nothing more,
particularly not for the memory which holds the firmware for the device.  Also,
any tamper-proof protection on volatile memory (RAM) is not necessary, as such
protection only makes sense if the threat model assumes the legitimate user to
be a potential attacker. This admittedly is the case for various Digital Rights
Management (DRM) or payment processing systems. For these systems the end user
is considered a potential enemy, who might want to illegally make a copy of a
movie, or clone credit card information. Indeed, only then the device would like
to protect its _runtime_ processing. Otherwise an attacker who managed to steal
the device would not be able to get it to start doing the processing of
sensitive data in its RAM, without providing a proper unlock password or key in
the first place. It's worrying that the industry has been aggressively
advertising various DRM-friendly technologies as protecting the user, while in
fact they have an opposite effect, degrading trustworthiness of the user devices
(from the user point of view, that is).

An exception would be a tamper-proof design which allowed for reliable read-only
access for all the firmware (and preventing access only to key-holding storage),
but it seems like existing devices (specifically microcontrollers) do not
support such a mode today, at least the author is not aware of any.


# Alternative solutions?

Many people voice concerns that perhaps a much better strategy is to ditch the
(Intel) x86 platform, and look for an alternative architecture as a foundation
for secure and trustworthy personal computers... In this chapter we quickly
review what options we might have, in practice, here.

## ARM-based platforms?

The ARM architecture [@wikipedia_arm_arch] seems like a natural candidate to
replace x86 for desktop computers, including laptops. Indeed it has already
dominated the smartphone and tablet markets, and it doesn't seem like the gap in
performance is that great between these devices. This indeed might seem like a
plausible direction at first sight, but there are at least two problems here:

First, there is no such thing as an "ARM processor" -- rather ARM releases only
a set of specifications and other IP, which are then licensed by various
vendors, such as NVIDIA, Samsung, Texas Instruments, and so forth. These vendors
then combine the licensed ARM IP with their own, creating unique final products:
the actual processors, customary called System-on-Chips (SoCs).

This large diversity of "ARM processors", while undoubtedly beneficial in some
aspects, is also problematic -- e.g. it presents multiple research targets for
security researchers, as well as for system architects and developers. E.g.
some of the SoCs would implement IOMMU functionality adhering to
the ARM-published specification, while others would use a completely different
technology, invented by the OEM that makes the SoC [@genode_armvirt].
   
Also, most of the ARM-based SoC's implement a so called TrustZone (TZ)
extension.  Of course, as with most technologies on ARM, TZ is just a
specification and not malicious in itself. However, it opens a possibility for
the vendors who produce TZ-compatible SoCs (which most do) to lock down their
processor so that their TZ implementation will not differ significantly from
Intel ME.

Also, there is nothing special in ARM-based architecture that could prevent a
vendor from introducing backdoors into the SoCs they produce.

## FPGA-based, true open source processors and platforms?

There are also efforts to create a fully open processor design ([@lowrisc],
[@Opf]). This surely is the proper way to go for our civilization, long term.
The important question is how much time it would take for such processors to
become performant enough for typical desktop workflows (e.g. watching HD movies,
running modern Web browsers or an office suite)?

But performance is only part of the story -- another question relates to
security technologies these processors should be offering? Technologies such as
e.g. IOMMU and potentially also CPU and memory virtualization?^[Arguably
virtualization technologies might not be needed for such new processors. On the
other hand, it might turn out more practical to port e.g. the existing Linux
kernel and recompile many of the currently used POSIX applications for these new
processors, than to write everything from scratch. In that case we would need
virtualization in order to implement reasonably strong compartmentalization.]

Sadly, it seems like we're at least years away from having consumer-grade
laptops based on such processors, and perhaps more than a decade from having
these systems offering isolation technologies on par with what the current Intel
processors offer.


# Summary

Personal computers have become extensions of our brains. This symbiosis is only
going to strengthen in the years to come, and not just metaphorically! The
author believes it should be paramount for humankind to ensure we can trust our
personal computers. Unfortunately the industry does not seem to share this
opinion. Not only do we not see much effort to create secure and trustworthy
hardware and Operating Systems, but we also witness the introduction of
technologies, such as Intel ME, that could undermine our trust in computers,
(especially personal computers) more than anytime before.

The strict separation of state-carrying (trusted) element from the rest of the
hardware, proposed in this paper, is an attempt to change this game in favour of
the user. While this solution might appeal to many as simple and elegant, care
should be exercised in understanding various implementation-specific subtleties,
many of which, hopefully, have been discussed in this paper.

The author thinks this clean separation of state might be beneficial not just
for Intel x86 systems, but also for other architectures of our future personal
computers.


# Credits {.unnumbered}

I would like to thank the following people for many insightful discussions as
well as for reviewing of this paper: Rop Gonggrijp (especially for turning my
attention to the problem of "state"), Peter Stuge (for sharing his rich hardware
expertise), and Rafał Wojtczuk (for being a great sparring partner in many
discussions).

# Contacting the author {.unnumbered}

Joanna Rutkowska can be contacted by email at: `joanna@invisiblethings.org`

Her personal master key fingerprint^[See http://blog.invisiblethings.org/keys/]
is also provided here for additional verification:

    ED72 7C30 6E76 6BC8 5E62  1AA6 5FA6 C3E4 D9AF BB99


# References {.unnumbered}


<!--- vim: se tw=80 dictionary+=biblio.bib : -->
